[Doc] [type] Add introduction to quantized types (#5705)
taichi-dev/taichi: docs/lang/articles/advanced/quant.md

Taichi provides low-precision ("quantized") data types. You can define your own integers,
fixed-point numbers or floating-point numbers with non-standard number of bits so
that you can choose a proper setting with minimum memory for your applications.
Taichi provides a suite of tailored domain-specific optimizations to ensure the
runtime performance with quantized data types close to that with full-precision
data types.

:::note
Quantized data types are only supported on CPU and CUDA backends for now.
:::

## Quantized data types

### Quantized integers

Modern computers represent integers using the [two's complement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two%27s_complement)
format. *Quantized integers* in Taichi adopt the same format, and can contain
non-standard number of bits:

```python
i10 = ti.types.quant.int(bits=10)  # 10-bit signed (default) integer type
u5 = ti.types.quant.int(bits=5, signed=False)  # 5-bit unsigned integer type
```

### Quantized fixed-point numbers

[Fixed-point numbers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fixed-point_arithmetic) are
an old way to represent real numbers. The internal representation of a fixed-point number is simply an integer, and

> its actual value equals to the integer multiplied by a predetermined scaling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
its actual value equals to the integer multiplied by a predefined scaling
```

factor. Based on the support for quantized integers, Taichi provides *quantized
fixed-point numbers* as follows:

```python
fixed_type_a = ti.types.quant.fixed(bits=10, max_value=20.0)  # 10-bit signed (default) fixed-point type within [-20.0, 20.0]
fixed_type_b = ti.types.quant.fixed(bits=5, signed=False, max_value=100.0)  # 5-bit unsigned fixed-point type within [0.0, 100.0]
fixed_type_c = ti.types.quant.fixed(bits=6, signed=False, scale=1.0)  # 6-bit unsigned fixed-point type within [0, 64.0]
```

`scale` is the scaling factor mentioned above. Because fixed-point numbers are
especially useful when you know the actual value is guaranteed to be within a
range, Taichi allows you to simply set `max_value` and will calculate the

> scaling factor for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
scaling factor accordingly.
```

float_type_b = ti.types.quant.float(exp=6, frac=9, signed=False)  # 15-bit unsigned floating-point type with 6 exponent bits
```

### Compute types

All the parameters you've seen above are specifying the *storage type* of a
quantized data type. However, most quantized data types have no native support
on hardware, so an actual value of that quantized data type needs to convert to
a primitive type ("*compute type*") when it is involved in computation.

The default compute type for quantized integers is `ti.i32`, while the default
compute type for quantized fixed-point/floating-point numbers is `ti.f32`. You
can change the compute type by specifying the `compute` parameter:

```python
i21 = ti.types.quant.int(bits=21, compute=ti.i64)
bfloat16 = ti.types.quant.float(exp=8, frac=8, compute=ti.f32)
```

## Data containers for quantized data types

Because the storage types are not primitive types, you may now wonder how
quantized data types can work together with data containers that Taichi
provides. In fact, some special constructs are introduced to eliminate the gap.

### Bitpacked fields

> `ti.BitpackedFields` is introduced to pack a group of fields whose `dtype`s are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ti.BitpackedFields` packs a group of fields whose `dtype`s are
```

quantized data types together so that they are stored with one primitive type.
You can then place a `ti.BitpackedFields` instance under any SNode as if each member field
is placed individually.

```python
a = ti.field(float_type_a)  # 15 bits
b = ti.field(fixed_type_b)  # 5 bits
c = ti.field(fixed_type_c)  # 6 bits
d = ti.field(u5)  # 5 bits
bitpack = ti.BitpackedFields(max_num_bits=32)
bitpack.place(a, b, c, d)  # 31 out of 32 bits occupied
ti.root.dense(ti.i, 10).place(bitpack)
```

#### Shared exponent

When multiple fields with quantized floating-point types are packed together,
there is chance that they can share a common exponent. For example, in a 3D
velocity vector, if you know the x-component has a much larger absolute value
compared to y- and z-components, then you probably do not care about the exact
value of the y- and z-components. In this case, using a shared exponent can
leave more bits for components with larger absolute values. You can use
`place(x, y, z, shared_exponent=True)` to make fields `x, y, z` share a common
exponent.

> #### Example 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example: 3D Eulerian fluid simulation
```

velocity, and an integer value for cell category with three possible values:
"source", "Dirichlet boundary", and "Neumann boundar". You can then store all
information with a single 32-bit `ti.BitpackedFields`:

```python
velocity_component_type = ti.types.quant.float(exp=6, frac=8, compute=ti.f32)
velocity = ti.Vector.field(3, dtype=velocity_component_type)

# Since there are only three cell categories, 2 bits are enough.
cell_category_type = ti.types.quant.int(bits=2, signed=False, compute=ti.i32)
cell_category = ti.field(dtype=cell_category_type)

voxel = ti.BitpackedFields(max_num_bits=32)
# Place three components of velocity into the voxel, and let them share the exponent.
voxel.place(velocity, shared_exponent=True)
# Place the 2-bit cell category.
voxel.place(cell_category)
# Create 512 x 512 x 256 voxels.
ti.root.dense(ti.ijk, (512, 512, 256)).place(voxel)
```

The compression scheme above allows you to store 13 bytes (4B x 3 + 1B) into
just 4 bytes. Note that you can still use velocity and cell_category in the
computation code, as if they are `ti.f32` and `ti.u8`.

![image](../static/assets/bitpacked_fields_layout_example.png)

> #### Example 2

Reviewer: nit: add a name for the example?

Here is a simpler example for you to try out. Assume you want to save memory for
[examples/simulation/euler.py](https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi/blob/master/python/taichi/examples/simulation/euler.py).
Most data definitions in the example are similar, so here only field `Q` is used
for illustration:

```python
Q = ti.Vector.field(4, dtype=ti.f32, shape=(N, N))
```

> An element of `Q` now occupies 4 x 32 = 128 bits. If you can make it fit in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An element of `Q` now occupies 4 x 32 = 128 bits. If you can fit it in
```

> 64 bits, then the memory usage can get halved. A direct and first attempt is to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
64 bits, then the memory usage is halved. A direct and first attempt is to
```

use quantized floating-point numbers with a shared exponent:

```python
float_type_c = ti.types.quant.float(exp=8, frac=14)
Q_old = ti.Vector.field(4, dtype=float_type_c)
bitpack = ti.BitpackedFields(max_num_bits=64)
bitpack.place(Q_old, shared_exponent=True)
ti.root.dense(ti.ij, (N, N)).place(bitpack)
```

Surprisingly, you may find that there is no obvious difference in visual effects
after the change. More attempts are left to you.

### Quant arrays

Bitpacked fields are actually laid in an array of structure (AOS) order.
However, there are also cases where a single quantized type is required to get
laid in an array. For example, you may want to store 8 x u4 values in a single
u32 type, to represent bin values of a histogram:

![image](../static/assets/quant_array_layout_example.png)

> Quant arrays are now introduced to help you. A `quant_array` is a SNode which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quant array is exactly what you need. A `quant_array` is a SNode which
```
